REACT.md, before:

# **React** Examples

The examples are *"ordered by difficulty"*.

* ### [My First React Component](https://codesandbox.io/s/eloquent-heyrovsky-fx800)
* ### [Parametrizing Components](https://codesandbox.io/s/strange-black-3peoj)
* ### [Using the `chilren` property](https://codesandbox.io/s/loving-bhabha-cjoe9)
* ### [Writing less HTML with React](https://codesandbox.io/s/optimistic-elgamal-ghs19)
* ### [Inline styling with `props`](https://codesandbox.io/s/optimistic-elgamal-ghs19)
* ### [More inline styling](https://codesandbox.io/s/sharp-grothendieck-zvitg)
* ### [Driving styling by props](https://codesandbox.io/s/focused-cori-frwn8)
* ### [Handling user events](https://codesandbox.io/s/reverent-breeze-zzovr)
* ### [My first stateful component](https://codesandbox.io/s/black-smoke-72bp1)
* ### [Another simple stateful component](https://codesandbox.io/s/fast-lake-5mevm)
* ### [Handling user input](https://codesandbox.io/s/fast-lake-5mevm)
* ### [Transforming user input](https://codesandbox.io/s/dazzling-thunder-6w7gk)

Commit message:

Provided links to learning resources.

REACT.md, after:

# **React** Examples

## Learning React
- ### Read the [Overview](https://reactjs.org/tutorial/tutorial.html#overview) on the official React website.
- ### Proceed with [Completing the Game](https://reactjs.org/tutorial/tutorial.html#completing-the-game) to learn how to implement a Tic-Tac-Toe game.

## Learn by Example
The examples are *"ordered by difficulty"*.

* ### [My First React Component](https://codesandbox.io/s/eloquent-heyrovsky-fx800)
* ### [Parametrizing Components](https://codesandbox.io/s/strange-black-3peoj)
* ### [Using the `chilren` property](https://codesandbox.io/s/loving-bhabha-cjoe9)
* ### [Writing less HTML with React](https://codesandbox.io/s/optimistic-elgamal-ghs19)
* ### [Inline styling with `props`](https://codesandbox.io/s/optimistic-elgamal-ghs19)
* ### [More inline styling](https://codesandbox.io/s/sharp-grothendieck-zvitg)
* ### [Driving styling by props](https://codesandbox.io/s/focused-cori-frwn8)
* ### [Handling user events](https://codesandbox.io/s/reverent-breeze-zzovr)
* ### [My first stateful component](https://codesandbox.io/s/black-smoke-72bp1)
* ### [Another simple stateful component](https://codesandbox.io/s/fast-lake-5mevm)
* ### [Handling user input](https://codesandbox.io/s/fast-lake-5mevm)
* ### [Transforming user input](https://codesandbox.io/s/dazzling-thunder-6w7gk)
